# Design-and-Analysis-of-algorithms

HUFFMAN ALGORITHM 

Huffman coding is a type of greedy algorithm developed by David A. Huffman during the late 19th century. It is one of the most used algorithms for various purposes all over the technical domain. This algorithm is commonly found in almost all programming languages like C, C++, Java, Python, JavaScript, etc.

Huffman coding is a greedy algorithm frequently used for lossless data compression. Therefore, a basic principle of Huffman coding is to compress and encode the text or the data depending on the frequency of the characters in the text.

The basic idea behind the Huffman coding algorithm is to assign the variable-length codes to input characters of text based on the frequencies of the corresponding character. So, the most frequent character gets the smallest code, and the least frequent character is assigned with the largest code.

Here, the codes assigned to the characters are termed prefix codes which means that the code assigned to one character is not the prefix of the code assigned to any other character. Using this technique, Huffman coding ensures that there is no ambiguity when decoding the generated bitstream.






As the above text is of 11 characters, each character requires 8 bits. Therefore, a total of 11x8=88 bits are required to send this input text.

Using Huffman coding, we will compress the text to a smaller size by creating a Huffman coding tree using the character frequencies and generating the code for each character.

Remember that we encode the text while sending it, and later, it is necessary to decode it. Hence, the decoding of the text is done using the same tree generated by the Huffman technique.

===================================================================================================================


Algorithm for Huffman Coding
 

1. initiate a priority queue 'Q' consisting of unique characters.
2. sort the priority queue according to the ascending order of frequencies 
3. for all the unique characters inside the queue:
    	Initialize a new Node 'a'
    	Return the minimum value of Q and assign it to the left child of 'a'
    	Return the next minimum value of Q and assign it to the right Child of 'a'
    	find the sum of both returned values and assign it as the value of 'a'
    	insert the value of 'a' into the tree
4. repeat the same process until all unique characters of 'Q' are visited
5. Return root node

 
 ==================================================================================================================
 
 
What is Huffman coding used for?
Huffman coding is used for conventional compression formats like GZIP, etc
It is used for text and fax transmission
It is used in statistical coding
Huffman coding is used by multimedia codecs like JPEG, PNG, MP3, etc

Reference : 
https://favtutor.com/blogs/huffman-coding
